Good morning.
So this morning we are, I'm Adam, this is Lucy.
This morning we're continuing our Root Rooted series and we're looking at fellowship, find your people and David Nickfort up.
It was a good idea because me Lucy and Marcia are kind of heading up life groups.
It was appropriate that we talk to you about that topic.
Me and Lucy were joking.
Given that we're kind of tag teaming this, what does when one person's talking, what does he have a person do?
Like, like interpretive dance, like get my aing out.
So, I don't know, we'll look, one of us will look around while the other one's talking.
So the goal of this series is all based on Psalm 1, date which Dave raised last week.
And the idea is that we have to be like trees that are planted by streams of living water.
And last week they've looked at how this can be done in a larger setting gathered environments like on a Sunday morning.
So this morning we're going to be looking at I guess more intimate environments and small groups.
Yeah, so today we want to look at fellowship in a broader setting and our goal is that by the end that we can each go away and look to action something in our relationships that is Jesus centred.
So that might mean signing up to a life group.
It might mean speaking to someone about a one to one meeting up or just being more intentional in your already existing spiritual friendships.
So we just don't want this morning to just be theoretical, but we do want to offer a little bit of teaching to encourage you to take steps that will strengthen your roots in God.
So what is fellowship?
The idea of fellowship a bit like cover words is
partly lost when you compare it to what the Bible teaches about a word fellowship.
We're actually going to use slightly different words just to freshen things up, which is spiritual friendship.
Because when you say the word fellowship, a lot of people might think of coffee mornings, or you'll go around to a little interest on one's house and say, I had fantastic fellowship at their house.
And that's not
wrong but it's just not the full picture of what the Bible says.
Galatians 6 verse 2 says we should carry each other's burdens and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.
I was like looking at what the meaning of one of the words means.
So that word burden in the Greek is different.
You see other words burden in New Testament and it's the different Greek word.
And the other uses talk about when you have an oxen that was laden with a burden and it was measured out.
Whereas this word doesn't have any idea of it being measured out.
So a burden we might have to be carrying might be too heavy for us.
It may not be possible to carry it on our own.
We have to carry each other's burdens.
Yeah.
So why else is fellowship or spiritual friendship with other believers so important?
Other than, because it's the only way we can carry our burdens.
So by the time we're near the end of Genesis 2, God has made the universe, including Adam.
Sin has not entered the world yet.
And as a result, God taught many times about how he is made is good.
And it even calls Adam very good.
But there's one thing that he says is not good.
Verse 18 reads, the Lord God said, it is not good for man to be alone.
And this is fascinating because nothing has been corrupted yet.
And still God says something is not good.
Or to put it another way, just making Adam even in a place where there was no sin at all was not enough.
Quite often, when this verse is used, it's given a narrow interpretation.
We hear it in marriage ceremonies a lot.
God does create Eve as a wife, but the principle is far broader than this.
It's about community, relationship, spiritual friendship.
And of course, there won't be marriage in heaven, not between humans, only with God and his bride of church.
In Mark chapter 12 verse 25, Jesus says,
When the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage.
They will be likely angels in heaven.
The Christian brothers and sisters we know now, however, will be in fellowship with us forever after death.
So if Eden is a foreshadowing of the new earth to come and in it, God says there is something not good about being alone and being together as believers is a fundamental part of eternity.
And so it should be now.
We need fellowship.
We need spiritual friendship.
All the time, even if we don't currently realize it, I've stolen this illustration from Tim Keller.
I didn't make it up.
But no one walks around thinking, I love air.
No one goes, oh, thanks for that breath.
Thanks for that breath.
We just do it subconsciously until we're underwater and suddenly...
Even just having a cold, not being able to breathe through your nose, you realise how much you need to breathe.
And spiritual friendship fellowship is very similar.
Often we don't realise how much we need it until things turn, things get bad.
And the problem is for deep spiritual friendship with Christians, we can't just click our fingers and have that intimacy when we need it.
It needs to be cultivated like Dave said last week before we run into trouble.
So Ecclesiastes 4 of verses 9 to 12 says,
Two are better than one because they have a good return for their labour.
If either of them falls down, one can help the other up, but pity anyone who falls and has no one to help them up.
Also, if two lie down together, they will keep warm, but how can one keep warm alone?
Though one may be overpowered, two can defend themselves.
A chord of three strands is not quickly broken.
We need spiritual friendship, not just any friendship, but the fellowship among believers who are unified by that third called Christ.
We need to have people who can help us up when we fall.
Spiritual friendship or fellowship is also a good combat to our sinfulness and tendency to self-justify.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer puts it well.
The more isolated a person is, the more destructive will be the power of his sin over him.
And the more deeply he becomes involved in it, the more disastrous is his isolation.
But since the confession of sin is made in the presence of a Christian brother, the last stronghold of self-justification is abandoned.
When we're not open with our faults, we tend to want to self-justify.
Certainly it's something that me and Adam do.
And even sharing your faults in marriage alone sometimes isn't enough.
because you're so unified and one that you still lean towards trying to tell yourself something isn't as bad as it is.
The beauty of our church's diversity is that others can take a more objective view of our lives and keep us honest, keep us accountable.
The act of vulnerability and spiritual friendship also helps in the opposite way, not just to prevent us from wrongly patting ourselves on the back, but to help us not wrongly tell ourselves off.
It can count to self-condemnation and self-criticism through encouraging one another and offering Jesus' message of grace.
I don't know about you, but I find it is often easier to show grace to others than it is to myself.
I have one particular friend, her name's Beth, and this is what she has offered me for the last 15 years.
We don't live physically close, but we make sure we maintain spiritual closeness by regular calls and visits.
We've often followed devotionals together, being able to spare each other on by sharing our thoughts via what's up, or sharing book quotes to each other, or worship songs we're really connecting with.
We regularly ask each other, how is your soul?
It's an interesting one to answer, but we answer it however we want, and are willing to challenge moments of compromise or wrong attitudes.
We are not yes men to each other.
but we are yes men to Jesus who have given each other permission to speak into our lives.
Proverbs 27 verse 17 says, as I am sharpens iron, so one person sharpens another and that's definitely my experience.
Through my spiritual friendship, fellowship with Beth, I've grown in my faith.
I've had someone who kept Jesus light shining to me during the dark times.
Someone who lovingly gently challenged me when my thinking was wrong.
and someone who demonstrated God's grace to me when I couldn't find it myself.
Surely the answer to how his soul is saved.
So back to my reasons for fellowship, God desires it.
I love this idea.
The ache for community that the original Adam will have had, and God recognized by saying it's not good for man to be alone, is the only ache that existed before sin entered the world.
All of the aches we might have for things are because of a fall.
If you are aching for spiritual friendship, in other words, if you are lonely, that desire to know and be known isn't dysfunctional.
Being lonely is not dysfunctional.
It's a sign of help.
There's not anything wrong with you.
I feel like I just need to pause for a second there.
The root feeling of loneliness means that your heart aligns with God's heart on the matter.
It's not good to be alone.
We are made to be in community, to have true spiritual friendship.
We have to be careful when we talk about loneliness because it's not always simple, it's not always caused by one thing.
The reason why someone might feel lonely can be because of their circumstances or it can be because of their actions.
It might be for reasons they brought about or others brought about, but regardless, feeling is to be human.
And what some of us do, what I do, if I'm honest, is to cope with sometimes feeling lonely is that you learn to not need others.
And I don't think it's usually a conscious thing.
No one walks around thinking, I will not need anyone today.
But we do develop coping habits that mean that we don't depend on others.
And I think we often suffer more hardship.
We choose to suffer more hardship rather than be alternative of making ourselves vulnerable and having spiritual friendship.
We might even think we're doing a good thing.
Might say it's in the name of independence or not being a burden on others, but
There is some truth in the fact that only God is truly dependable, but he designed life to be lived in community, and he often supports us through other people.
So, you've probably heard this quote before, but C.S.
Lewis talks about love, and he says, to love at all is to be vulnerable.
Love anything in your heart will be wrong and possibly broken.
If you want to make sure of keeping it intact, you must give it to no one, not even an animal.
Wrap it carefully round with hobbies and little luxuries, avoid all entanglements, lock it up safe in the casket or coffin of your selfishness.
But in that casket, safe, dark, motionless, airless, it will change, it will not be broken, it will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable, to love is to be vulnerable.
And I suggest spiritual friendship is exactly the same.
To need of us is to risk being let down, disappointed,
where a problem is when we choose self-sufficiency, we move away from the heart of God.
And as that verse in Galatians suggests, we can't carry our own burdens.
Even Jesus, who did not need anyone else, chose to share his life with 12 individuals.
He shared everything with them.
And in return, one of them betrayed him.
They constantly misunderstood him.
They questioned what he was doing at every turn.
but he still chose their friendship fellowship, even to the one who would turn on him.
So how can we grow in spiritual friendship?
The New Testament Greek word coinonia means sharing.
God wants us as a community of believers to share everything.
So what do we share?
We share our time in a culture of, sorry, in a culture of busyness,
God asks, we are open-handed with who we spend our time with.
We are to share our things, resisting the temptation to think that just because we worked hard to earn money and buy things, we own them in any meaningful sense.
The earth is the Lord and everything in it.
We're to share our emotions, trusting people with how we're really feeling when people ask you how you are in us in the morning, how do you answer?
Not being guarded all the time, not worrying about what they might think of you.
and we are to share our decisions, being willing to change our mind on things when others give another perspective.
There is attention here, too.
Spiritual friendship, fellowship, is both discovered and it's made.
It's not just something you discover but also make, and it's not something that you only make, it has to be discovered.
It's discovered because all true friendship that lasts has a shared interest or circumstance.
To quote C. S. Lewis again,
Those people who simply want friends can never make any.
The very condition of having friends is that we should want something else besides friends.
The typical expression of the beginning of friendship would be something like, what?
You too.
I thought I was the only one.
The greatest thing about our faith is that it is the greatest shared interest or circumstance to ever exist.
that we, in this room today and in the church wider, we are united in our love for Christ.
We have that shared interest, that shared circumstance through Him.
So though we may share nothing else, we do share the most fundamental life-changing truth and that is enough.
So a few examples, I don't think I've seen Denise here this morning.
No, she is.
I don't think she is, but I'm gonna talk about Denise.
So mine and Denise's friendship,
Denise has been coming to our small group for seven, eight years, every week.
And me and Denise have very little in common, apart from our faith.
We're at different life stages.
We have different interests.
She hates cheese.
I love cheese.
She's very important.
But we have really beautiful friendship because we both love cheeses and we both want to be more like cheeses.
She is so open with how she is and I try to be too, but actually I value my friendship with Denise more than someone who might not know the Lord who shares everything in common with I do with me.
At the same time, spiritual friendship has to be made.
You have to be intentional to nurture it.
We can let the excuse of other parts of our life get in the way and it can fall by the wayside.
So another example, sorry Andrew, is my friendship with Andrew memory.
So Andrew since 2011, 2012 has
every six to eight weeks, it's usually you but messages me.
I try and remember to.
He'll message me and say, do you want to go for a walk?
And we'll go for a walk every six a.m. And it means we've got to sacrifice our time and with little kids, our sleep as well.
But how Andrew has been faithful in just messaging me, it's actually girded.
My life is last 10 years because it's meant that there's been an opportunity to be vulnerable.
We don't have an agenda.
It's not like he sends me a tinnery that wouldn't surprise me.
We just talk about how life is and how our faith is.
But that's also required being intentional.
So to offer some more examples, to get you also thinking about what spiritual friendship might look like for you.
Life groups, sorry.
So Sunday morning gatherings are fundamental to being the body of Christ, but they aren't enough.
It's difficult to have real depth and intimacy with others on a Sunday morning.
alone in a group of 100 people.
There is something special about regular time with the same people every week or every fortnight.
It's why me and Lucy have always felt that we had to prioritise leading a small group when other things have got harder.
We've had to put other stuff on the back burner.
So there's also other gatherings of Christians, and I'm sure there'll be other situations like this, but just to give you an example of what I know.
I'm part of an online community called the Faith Filled Collective, which is a group of light-minded women who use teaching from neuroscience, psychology stuff, to grow in our faith.
And we have a monthly webinar, a connection call, and an ongoing WhatsApp group.
It's open to any woman with a monthly subscription fee.
Come and talk to me more at the end if that sounds like something you'd be interested in and I'll be happy to tell you more.
But like I say, I think there are other kind of online connected, faith-based groups that you can find out.
Or maybe there's one-on-one regular meet-ups with someone that can be really important.
Maybe with someone who shares some of your life circumstances, but not others.
Maybe someone who's a bit further ahead than you or just has a different perspective.
creating space to challenge each other and checking in with whether you've implemented what you've said you would last time and sharing answers to prayer.
So maybe just someone you can check in with as though we're a spiritual MOT but more than once a year.
We've talked in church before about spiritual, emotional, physical scales.
And they're a really good starting point to open up deeper conversations, if you feel how is your soul is a bit intense and broad.
So you give yourself a number or a number range, really the number doesn't matter.
The point is that it's some kind of marking out a 10 for how you're doing spiritually, emotionally and physically.
And then you use it to open up
board of conversations as why you're feeling like that, what you could do to change it and so on.
Or even alpha, one of the reasons alpha so powerful is because you come with somebody and you are journeying your questions about life and faith with people and that's why it's always good to come with someone.
Or reading a Christian book together, meet up with one or two other people to discuss it.
I've done this in the past, it helps you
take time to read the book in between, and then also have a space to ask questions and just share your thoughts.
We've never read a book together here, I mean, it's funny to other people, but it's about... Maybe we will.
Maybe we should.
So to conclude... That's because we need two copies of the book.
That's true.
We read it one after the other.
In order to be rooted in Christ and flourishing,
we have to be rooted in one another, in community, in spiritual friendship.
It's God's heart that we are true, in true and intimate community of other people.
Loneliness is a symptom, but you share God's heart, not that you are dysfunctional.
We need fellowship and it means sharing everything and having a courage to try again.
And fellowship is both discovered and made.
So we want to leave you with a question or are there a few questions?
How can you pursue spiritual friendship more starting today?
What do you need to help facilitate this?
Are there walls of self-sufficiency that you need to ask God to knock down?
Are there past hurts that mean you're scared to start again which you could spend some time giving to God?
Do you just need to be more intentional this year with your Christian friends?
Can you join on more regularly attend a life group?
This week,
Can you choose one person or one group and make one change?
So there's a bit of a change to a norm and we didn't plan this, but we thought rather than having ministry time, we would just try and have five.
What time is it?
There we go.
Yeah, five or so minutes of intentional time space where you can be thinking about an action you might want to take.
You could go across the room and see if there's someone you could meet up with.
You could send a message to someone.
You already share friendship with a range of time to catch up with them.
You could sign up to a life group.
You can invite someone to lunch today.
And then Lucy will come back in
however many minutes, and I guess formally finishes service, but it just gives you space before just our three children come and cause chaos.
Yeah, so we'll also end the live stream there.
Thank you for joining us today for the live stream.